---
layout: post
title: GSoC'20 - Week 12
---

This week's work involved removing many of the old solvers and adding 2 new solvers.

# Linear, n equations, Order 1, Type 5 and 6

The types 5 and 6 added this week are given below:

```
X' = f(t)*A*X + b(t)
```

Where `X` is the vector of dependent variables, `f(t)` is a scalar invertible function in terms of `t`,  `A` is a constant matrix and `b(t)` is the vector of non-homogeneous term.

The above system is type 5 if the system is homogeneous else its type 6.

Now, the above system can be classified to either type 3 or type 4 where the coefficient matrix needs to have a commutative antiderivative but this case can be solved faster than solving with type 3 or type 4.

We are going to transform this system with the substitution:

```
tau = F(t) = integrate(f(t), t)
```

With this substitution, lets create a new vector of dependent variables `Y(tau)` where `tau` is the independent variable. Then:

```
X(t) = Y(tau)
d/dt(X(t)) = d/dt(Y(tau)) = d/d(tau)(Y(tau)) * d(tau)/dt = Y' * f(t)
```

Hence, if we substitute for `X` and `X'` in the system, then we will get:

```
Y'*f(t) = f(t)*A*Y + b(t)
Y' = A*Y + b(t)/f(t)
```
Now, for `b(t)/f(t)`, we would have to substitute for the value of `t` in terms of `tau` to get the final system:

```
tau = F(t)
t = F-1(tau)
```
We would have to substitute the inverse of `tau `'s value to get the final transformed system:
```
Y' = A*Y + b'(tau)
```
Now, the above system can be quickly solved by type 1 or type 2 solver, which are much faster. After solving for `Y`, we just have to substitute `tau` back as `t` by using `tau = F(t)`:

```
X(t) = Y(F(t))
```

# Linear, n equations, Order n, Type 2

Type 0 is the introducing the dummy variables type, Type 1 is the standard Cauchy-Euler systems.

Type 2 is given by the following:
```
X(n)(t) = f(t)*A*X + b(t)
```
Where `X` is the vector of dependent variables, `b(t)` is the non-homogeneous term,`A` is the constant matrix and `X(n)(t)` is the nth order derivative of the vector `X`.

Now, computing the jordan normal form of the matrix `A`:
```
A = P*J*P-1
```

We will substitute this in the system	and get the transformed system:
```
X(n) = f(t)*P*J*P-1*X + b(t)
P-1*X(n) = f(t)*J*P-1*X + P-1*b(t)
```
Now, substituting `Z = P-1*X(n)`, we get:
```
Z = f(t)*J*Z + P-1*b
```

Now, normally a jordan normal form matrix has a form:
```
[ e1 1                           ]
[    e1 1                        ]
[       e1                       ]
[          e2 1                  ]
[              e2                ]
[                 e3             ]
[                    ..          ]
[                      ..        ]
[                         en 1   ]
[                             en ]
```

Hence, its easy to see that, with multiplication of Jordan matrix with the vector `Z`, we will get a system that may have independent sub-systems, i.e. the system which can be divided into sub-systems using strongly and weakly connected components. Hence, we use this to solve systems of the above form and finally, after we have the solution for `Z(t)`, we can get `X(t)` by the substitutionL:
```
X(t) = P * Z(t)
```


# Solvers that were removed

1. Linear 2 equations, Order 2, Type 3: This solver was removed using the simple method to introduce dummy variables as this system is constant coefficient.
2. Linear, 2 equations, Order 2, Type 7: This solver was removed due to numerous reasons like introducing higher order to first order reduction, splitting of the systems and adding a `dsolve` call for single ODE systems.
3. Linear 2 equations, Order 2, Type 6: When a general case solver was added for solving these types of systems.

Note: Its important that the module eventually can detect the minimum order of the dependent variables and reduce those terms before hand since smaller matrix sizes will lead to faster results.


# Work for the final week

For the final week, two things needs to be completed:
1. Writing and submitting the report for GSoC.
2. Completing the simplification method addition to simplify great many number of systems.
