---
layout: post
title: GSoC'20 - Week 1 and Week 2
---

This blog contains the details of the work that I have done for week 1 and week 2. Since my college decided to take open book examinations online in the first week of June, I was busy in the first week with my exams. Hence, this post contains the work that I have done for both the weeks together.

These two weeks went roughly on getting simpler solutions for the system of ODEs which are of type 2, that is, they are linear first order constant coefficient non-homogeneous. 

The simplification methods are:

1. ```simpsol``` method: Makes a polynomial like expression from the exponential terms which are factorized, simplifies the rational terms in all the coefficients of the made up polynomial.

2. ```solsimp``` method: Simplifies the expression using powsimp, divides the expression into terms that are dependent and independent of the independent variable(`t`), carries out rational term simplification for the part of the expression independent of `t`, factorizes the power of the exponential terms of the expression dependent on `t` and adds both these simplified parts up.

These methods were checked throughly and analysis was also done for these methods. The link for the analysis is [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1eZ3U1DComPEpMVXOkSJl5ThxUno16aQ78lonC8sSbos/edit?usp=sharing). 

So, the work for the type 2 solver is almost over and the PR will be merged soon. In the upcoming week, the target is to complete the work for type 4 solver.
